Analysis of air pollution levels before and after lockdown in Delhi, India (#111)
numpy/numpy-tutorials: content/tutorial-air-quality-analysis.md

---
jupytext:
  formats: ipynb,md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.11.5
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Analysis of air pollution levels before and after lockdown in Delhi, India

## What you'll do

Calculate Air Quality Indices (AQI) and perform paired t-test on them.

## What you'll learn

- You'll compute moving averages

- You'll calculate Air Quality Index (AQI)

- You'll perform a paired t-test and find the t and p values

> - You'll learn to interpret these values

Reviewer: I feel like these are more "What you'll do" and only the last bullet actually talks about what the reader will learn. Maybe this can be rephrased.

## What you'll need

- SciPy and Matplotlib installed in your environment

- Basic understanding of statistical terms like population, sample, mean, standard deviation etc.

***

```{code-cell} ipython3
# import necessary libraries

import numpy as np
from scipy.stats import t
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

%matplotlib inline
```

## Building the dataset

We will import hourly measurements of standard pollutants: Particulate Matter (PM 10 and PM 2.5),
Nitrogen dioxide (NO2), ammonia (NH3), sulfur dioxide (SO2), carbon monoxide (CO), and ozone (O3), from a *.csv file

> to ndarrays. This data has been collected in the period of 31/05/2019 to 30/06/2020.

Reviewer: Can you include a source link for the data? Is it publicly available?

Reviewer: Also, it might be nicer to have some small paragraph on why this data is relevant for measuring air quality - there's usually some blurb when these kinds of datasets are made public so it may be just a matter of citing it here.

Author: Sure, I can do that. I've used a condensed version of a publicly available dataset; I'll mention that.

```{code-cell} ipython3
! head air-quality-data.csv
```

> We'll initially have two sets: *pollutants_A* and *pollutants_B* because we will need to compute their rolling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll initially have two sets: `pollutants_A` and `pollutants_B` because we will need to compute their rolling
```

kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Analyzing the impact of the lockdown on air quality in Delhi, India

![A grid showing the India Gate in smog above and clear air below](_static/11-delhi-aqi.jpg)

## What you'll do

Calculate Air Quality Indices (AQI) and perform paired Student's t-test on them.

## What you'll learn

- You'll learn the concept of moving averages

- You'll learn how to calculate Air Quality Index (AQI)

- You'll learn how to perform a paired Student's t-test and find the `t` and `p` values

- You'll learn how to interpret these values

## What you'll need

- [SciPy](https://scipy.org/install/) and [Matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/stable/users/installing/index.html) installed in your environment

- Basic understanding of statistical terms like population, sample, mean, standard deviation etc.

***

+++

## The problem of air pollution

Air pollution is one of the most prominent types of pollution we face that has an immediate effect on our daily lives. The
COVID-19 pandemic resulted in lockdowns in different parts of the world, offering a rare opportunity to study the effect of

> human activity (or lack there of) on air pollution. In this tutorial, we will study the air quality in Delhi, one of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
human activity (or lack thereof) on air pollution. In this tutorial, we will study the air quality in Delhi, one of the
```

from May 31, 2019 to June 30, 2020. It has measurements of the standard pollutants that are required for Air Quality Index calculation and a few other important ones:
Particulate Matter (PM 2.5 and PM 10), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), ammonia (NH3), sulfur dioxide (SO2), carbon monoxide (CO), ozone (O3), oxides of nitrogen (NOx), nitric oxide (NO), benzene, toluene, and xylene.

Let's print out the first few rows to have a glimpse of our dataset.

```{code-cell} ipython3
! head air-quality-data.csv
```

For the purpose of this tutorial, we are only concerned with standard pollutants required for calculating the AQI, viz., PM 2.5, PM 10, NO2, NH3, SO2, CO, and O3. So, we will only import these particular columns with [np.genfromtxt](https://numpy.org/devdocs/reference/generated/numpy.genfromtxt.html). We'll initially create two sets: `pollutants_A` with PM 2.5, PM 10, NO2, NH3, and SO2, and `pollutants_B` with CO and O3. The
two sets will be processed slightly differently, as we'll see later on.

```{code-cell} ipython3

> pollutants_A = np.genfromtxt("air-quality-data.csv", dtype='f8', delimiter=",",
>                              skip_header=1, usecols=(1, 2, 3, 4, 5))
> pollutants_B = np.genfromtxt("air-quality-data.csv", dtype='f8', delimiter=",",
>                              skip_header=1, usecols=(6, 7))

Reviewer 2: Just a nit - it'd be more efficient to only read from file once and then slice out the columns you'd like to use, e.g. something like:

```suggestion
pollutant_data = np.loadtxt("air-quality-data.csv", dtype=float, delimiter=",",
                            skiprows=1, usecols=range(1, 8))
pollutants_A = pollutant_data[:, 0:5]  # PM2.5, PM10, NO2, NH3, and SO2
pollutants_B = pollutant_data[:, 5:]  # CO and O3
```

Note also the use of `loadtxt` instead of `genfromtext`, which will (hopefully) be much faster in the next NumPy release!

print(pollutants_A.shape)
print(pollutants_B.shape)
```

Our dataset might contain missing values, denoted by `NaN`, so let's do a quick check with [np.isnan](https://numpy.org/devdocs/reference/generated/numpy.isnan.html).

```{code-cell} ipython3

> print(np.where(np.isnan(pollutants_A) == True))
> print(np.where(np.isnan(pollutants_B) == True))

Reviewer 2: Just a suggestion, feel free to ignore:

```suggestion
np.all(np.isfinite(pollutants_A)) and np.all(np.isfinite(pollutants_B))
```
Or, better yet, if you do decide to go with the `pollutant_data` approach, you can just run `np.all(np.isfinite(pollutant_data))`

```

With this, we have successfully imported the data and checked that it is complete. Let's move on to the AQI calculations!

+++

## Calculating the Air Quality Index

We will calculate the AQI using [the method](https://app.cpcbccr.com/ccr_docs/FINAL-REPORT_AQI_.pdf) adopted by the [Central Pollution Control Board](https://www.cpcb.nic.in/national-air-quality-index) of India.  To summarize the steps:

- Collect 24-hourly average concentration values for the standard pollutants; 8-hourly in case of CO and O3.

- Calculate the sub-indices for these pollutants with the formula: 

> $Ip = \dfrac{\text{IHi – ILo}}{\text{BPHi – BPLo}}\cdot{\text{Cp – BPLo}} + \text{ILo}$

Reviewer: I suggest putting this formula in its own line:
```suggestion
$$Ip = \dfrac{\text{IHi – ILo}}{\text{BPHi – BPLo}}\cdot{\text{Cp – BPLo}} + \text{ILo}$$
```

> - Calculate the sub-indices for these pollutants with the formula: 
> $$Ip = \dfrac{\text{IHi – ILo}}{\text{BPHi – BPLo}}\cdot{\text{Cp – BPLo}} + \text{ILo}$$

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Calculate the sub-indices for these pollutants with the formula: 

$$
Ip = \dfrac{\text{IHi – ILo}}{\text{BPHi – BPLo}}\cdot{\text{Cp – BPLo}} + \text{ILo}
$$
```
Just to get the math formatting correctly

>     Where,
> 
>     `Ip` = sub-index of pollutant `p`\
>     `Cp` = averaged concentration of pollutant `p`\
>     `BPHi` = concentration breakpoint i.e. greater than or equal to `Cp`\
>     `BPLo` = concentration breakpoint i.e. less than or equal to `Cp`\
>     `IHi` = AQI value corresponding to `BPHi`\
>     `ILo` = AQI value corresponding to `BPLo`

Reviewer 2: Indenting by 4 spaces here moves this section into literal block. I'm not sure if this was intentional, but in case it wasn't it can be prevented by reducing the indentation level, e.g.
```suggestion
  Where,

  `Ip` = sub-index of pollutant `p`\
  `Cp` = averaged concentration of pollutant `p`\
  `BPHi` = concentration breakpoint i.e. greater than or equal to `Cp`\
  `BPLo` = concentration breakpoint i.e. less than or equal to `Cp`\
  `IHi` = AQI value corresponding to `BPHi`\
  `ILo` = AQI value corresponding to `BPLo`
```

Author: The indentation is on purpose so that everything is contained inside the bullet point.

To make sure both the sets are of the same length, we will truncate the `pollutants_B_8hr_avg` according to the length of
`pollutants_A_24hr_avg`. This will also ensure we have concentrations for all the pollutants over the same period of time.

```{code-cell} ipython3
def moving_mean(a, n):
    ret = np.cumsum(a, dtype=float, axis=0)
    ret[n:] = ret[n:] - ret[:-n]
    return ret[n - 1:] / n

pollutants_A_24hr_avg = moving_mean(pollutants_A, 24)
pollutants_B_8hr_avg = moving_mean(pollutants_B, 8)[-(pollutants_A_24hr_avg.shape[0]):]
```

Now, we can join both sets with [np.concatenate](https://numpy.org/devdocs/reference/generated/numpy.concatenate.html) to form a single data set of all the averaged concentrations. Note that we have to join our arrays column-wise so we pass the
`axis=1` parameter.

```{code-cell} ipython3
pollutants = np.concatenate((pollutants_A_24hr_avg, pollutants_B_8hr_avg), axis=1)
```

### Sub-indices

> The subindices for each pollutant are calculated according to the linear relationship between the AQI and standard breakpoint ranges with the formula as above: $Ip = \dfrac{\text{IHi – ILo}}{\text{BPHi – BPLo}}\cdot{\text{Cp – BPLo}} + \text{ILo}$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The subindices for each pollutant are calculated according to the linear relationship between the AQI and standard breakpoint ranges with the formula as above:

$$
Ip = \dfrac{\text{IHi – ILo}}{\text{BPHi – BPLo}}\cdot{\text{Cp – BPLo}} + \text{ILo}
$$
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
vcompute_indices = np.vectorize(compute_indices)
```

By calling our vectorized function `vcompute_indices` for each pollutant, we get the sub-indices. To get back an array with the original shape, we use [np.stack](https://numpy.org/devdocs/reference/generated/numpy.stack.html).

```{code-cell} ipython3
sub_indices = np.stack((vcompute_indices('PM2.5', pollutants[..., 0]),
                        vcompute_indices('PM10', pollutants[..., 1]),
                        vcompute_indices('NO2', pollutants[..., 2]),
                        vcompute_indices('NH3', pollutants[..., 3]),
                        vcompute_indices('SO2', pollutants[..., 4]),
                        vcompute_indices('CO', pollutants[..., 5]),
                        vcompute_indices('O3', pollutants[..., 6])), axis=1)
```

### Air quality indices

Using [np.amax](https://numpy.org/devdocs/reference/generated/numpy.amax.html), we find out the maximum sub-index for each period, which is our Air Quality Index!

```{code-cell} ipython3

> aqi_array = np.amax(sub_indices, axis=1)

Reviewer 2: I'd vote to just use `max`, which should give the same result, but has a more straightforward name.

```suggestion
aqi_array = np.max(sub_indices, axis=1)
```

the data from 31st May, we truncated that during the moving averages step.

+++

## Paired Student's t-test on the AQIs

Hypothesis testing is a form of descriptive statistics used to help us make decisions with the data. From the calculated AQI data, we want to find out if there was a statistically significant difference in average AQI before and after the lockdown was imposed. We will use the left-tailed, [paired Student's t-test](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Student%27s_t-test#Dependent_t-test_for_paired_samples) to compute two test statistics- the [`t statistic`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/T-statistic) and the [`p value`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/P-value). We will then compare these with the corresponding critical values to make a decision.

![Normal distribution plot showing area of rejection in one-tailed test (left tailed)](_static/11-one-tailed-test.svg)

### Sampling

We will now import the `datetime` column from our original dataset into a [*datetime64* dtype](https://numpy.org/devdocs/reference/arrays.scalars.html) array. We will use this array to index the AQI array and obtain subsets of the dataset.

```{code-cell} ipython3

> datetime = np.genfromtxt("air-quality-data.csv", dtype='M8[h]', delimiter=",",

Reviewer 2: Same deal here, prefer loadtxt but not a blocker.

                         skip_header=1, usecols=(0, ))[-(pollutants_A_24hr_avg.shape[0]):]
```

Since total lockdown commenced in Delhi from March 24, 2020, the after-lockdown subset is of the period March 24, 2020 to June 30, 2020. The before-lockdown subset is for the same length of time before 24th March.

```{code-cell} ipython3
after_lock = aqi_array[np.where(datetime >= np.datetime64('2020-03-24T00'))]

before_lock = aqi_array[np.where(datetime <= np.datetime64('2020-03-21T00'))][-(after_lock.shape[0]):]

print(after_lock.shape)
print(before_lock.shape)
```

To make sure our samples are *approximately* normally distributed, we take samples of size `n = 30`. `before_sample_A` and `after_sample_A` are the set of random observations drawn before and after the total lockdown. We use [np.random.permutation](https://numpy.org/devdocs/reference/random/generated/numpy.random.permutation.html) to generate the samples.

```{code-cell} ipython3

> before_sample = np.random.permutation(before_lock)[:30]
> after_sample = np.random.permutation(after_lock)[:30]

Reviewer 2: We should be using the Generator-based random interface here, since it is the recommended interface:
```suggestion
rng = np.random.default_rng()
before_sample = rng.permutation(before_lock)[:30]
after_sample = rng.permutation(after_lock)[:30]
```

Also, since this is sampling from a dataset, you may want to consider `choice` instead, though your way may be faster :)
```python
before_sample = rng.choice(before_lock, size=30, replace=False)
```

Author: `choice` is in fact faster so I have decided to use it!

```

### Defining the hypothesis

Let us assume that there is no significant difference between the sample means before and after the lockdown. This will be the null hypothesis. The alternative hypothesis would be that there *is* a significant difference between the means and the AQI *improved*. Mathematically,

> $H_{0}: \mu_{after-before} = 0$ \
> $H_{a}: \mu_{after-before} < 0$

Reviewer: nit but I feel makes it more readable:
```suggestion
$H_{0}: \mu_\text{after-before} = 0$ \
$H_{a}: \mu_\text{after-before} < 0$
```

+++

### Calculating the test statistics

We will use the `t` statistic to evaluate our hypothesis and even calculate the `p value` from it. The formula for the `t` statistic is:

> $t = \frac{\mu_{after-before}}{\sqrt{\sigma^{2}/n}}$

Reviewer: Same as above, might go on its own line to make the font larger and more readable:
```suggestion
$$t = \frac{\mu_\text{after-before}}{\sqrt{\sigma^{2}/n}}$$
```

where,

> $\mu_{after-before}$ = mean differences of samples \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$\mu_\text{after-before}$ = mean differences of samples \
```
